---
layout: post
title:  "Amusing ourselves to death or what I've written will blow your mind"
date:   2017-10-22 13:30:00
---

# Amusing ourselves to death or What I’ve written about it will blow your mind
4/5

I am giving it 4 out of 5 stars mostly that I’ve read a lot about this topic now and a lot of the critic of TV didn’t seem all that new since I’ve been thinking a lot about the attention economy off late and how app designers would do just about anything to make sure that you are hooked to their app. As it turns out this is eerily similar to what people were willing to do to get you hooked to TV in the 1985. On second thought I shouldn’t have expected it to be different really. 

Neil Postman in the book contrasts two different eras in America political discourse one from the late 18th century to the end of 19th century where people were accustomed to reading books and pamphlets and newspapers as pastime and one from early 20th century where people basically watch TV for everything. He introduces an interesting term called ‘resonance’ where the effects of the medium spread out of the medium itself and is reflected in things that have nothing to do with the medium. His argument throughout the whole thing is that a culture where TV is the dominant medium, everything becomes entertainment and everything has to become entertainment to stay relevant. 

In the first era, ‘the age of exposition’ from late 18th to the end of 19th century, books used to be the dominant medium of culture. Postman argues that this is because of the printing press, the founding fathers being intellectually inclined and in general there wasn’t any medium which was dominated by images. In particular the importance of books or pamphlets or newspapers isn’t just that it’s text it a particular kind of text that makes it amenable to introspection and rational discussion this is in contrast to the telegraph where you can delivery information out of any context. in the mid 19th century Lincoln and Douglas would debate on issues for seven hours at a time. This is unbelievable to be honest especially as someone who has seen politician as someone whose job is to explain to the public everything in less than 30 seconds. 

But the long debates aren’t the point of the first part of the book, the point is that the dominant cultural medium which he calls typography is something that promotes such long heavy discussions and this medium resonates(I’m not sure if I can use this term this way) in to other things. Typographic mediums in general favour ‘linear’ and ‘logical’ sequence of arguments from one point to another and especially preserving the context as much as you can, since you can’t do much else with a typographic medium, there isn’t really any aesthetic value to the look and feel of the letters of the words, to make any impact you have to make sense and since this is a slow medium where the reader is given the time to interpret and introspect, it’s actually something where getting away with random bullshit is more difficult than TV where you have a bunch of distractions to keep you occupied. 

This age began to end with the invention of the telegraph and then finally came to an end with the printed photograph. Both the telegraph and the photograph are decontextualised mediums, they offer news a commodity in itself. The value of the news has nothing to do with what you might want to do with it or what’s useful for you in life, it’s just information you’re supposed to know. As an exercise try thinking about anything useful/valuable in the news that you’ve read in the past 30 days.  The photograph on the other hand takes away the history from the news, as a medium a picture is completely about the present, you can’t present history in it or any historical context of logical argument in the picture, you can just make a factual statement. Both these technologies moved the newspapers away from presenting argument and political discourse that would actually impact the life of the individuals in to something that’s more factual and decontextualised read buzzfeed of the 19th century. 

The TV takes this to its logical end. The TV as a medium promotes entertainment and entertainment requires a certain amount of attractiveness, while Obama can become president, it’s difficult to imagine a obese bald guy becoming president of the US now. Part of the reason why the TV does this is that there are so many options to choose from and when given an option people will take the path to least resistance. We can argue that we have fallen from some high pedestal of rational discourse or just accept the fact that human beings are pretty awful at resisting entertainment. So if you were to go out and present a lengthy discourse on the pressing foreign policy issues of the time people would just skip the channel. Also Postman argues is the fact that the medium in itself is biased towards entertainment, in the sense making a lengthy informed argument on TV is like trying to do poetry with smoke signals, the medium just isn’t meant for this. I couldn’t really understand this point, case in point being HBO. But there’s little argument about what he claims to be the effect of TV, it’s entertainment everywhere. Politicians have to hire image managers, need to speak short rememberable quotable sentences on TV and everyone needs to look presentable. This of course has resonated off of television itself, your news now has sensational headlines which sound entertaining, education is entertainment (Sesame Street), religion is entertainment. In such an environment it’s difficult to imagine an Abraham Lincoln who apparently suffered from depression could have become president. 

I agree with most of the book and for a book written in 1985 this was prescient to say the least, the first half of the book where he portrays the rational typographic mind as the pinnacle of civilisation isn’t all that convincing. His whole argument is very similar to the idea that we’ve fallen from grace and the world of 1858 where everyone read for pleasure and had long hours of attention to provide to issues of pressing importance, while today we’re simply amusing ourselves with trivialities. One of the arguments he provides is the fact that people of the past could comprehend long convoluted sentences not just in writing but in speech too and quotes a bunch of examples by Lincoln and Douglas. This is definitely not a good thing in itself, you can go back to Ancient Rome and the language was latin, arguably much more difficult than English itself but no one would make that choice,  even if you could get all the pleasures of 1858 and replace english with latin. Also simpler sentences when conveying the same thing are ‘obviously’ better. This article makes some points on the same issue [Presidential Speeches Were Once College-Level Rhetoric—Now They’re for Sixth-Graders - The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/10/have-presidential-speeches-gotten-less-sophisticated-over-time/381410/). 

But Tv is old news now, now we have the internet and the iPhone. Also Tv never penetrated India like the smartphone did. I think the most mature of the medium of the internet age now is Facebook. Facebook as a medium promotes sharable content, content which a lot of companies have understood this idea. This had little to do with the smartphone but everything to do with the fact that it was a network where sharing promoted the value of the thing. Some of the things Facebook promotes are 
1. Sharing: Buzz feed caught this the earliest or at least the best. On Facebook news isn’t supposed to be discussed, it’s supposed to be shared on the timeline. 
2. Catchy headlines: This is due to the fact that for some reason people want traffic on their site and the best way to get this is to say, what happened next will blow your mind 
3. Short content: in an infinitely following news feed you don’t want to focus your attention on something for too long, also people don’t have attention span longer than 10 seconds these days
4. No Context: You don’t want your posts to reference another post which make a long claim since no one will bother going back reading that and coming back to this one. 
5. Fake News: This directly ties in with the no context point, in a medium where it’s difficult to express content you can just claim whatever you like and get away with it, since people weren’t going to spend time checking it any way. 
None of these points are specific to Facebook really except for sharing, but what really sets Facebook apart is the echo chamber it creates. While there have been newspapers and other media houses targeting certain sections of the society since long or taking a certain point of view, in a medium like Facebook which makes sure that you don’t see what you don’t like to see it’s easy to get caught up in your own echo chamber. you’ll only be shown content that you want to see. This isn’t similar to a news channel dedicated to a section of the people adhering to  certain views, it’s actually only seeing what you want to see, so if you’re likely to watch a bunch of cat videos the medium will make sure that you only get to see the cat videos, the relevant announcement by the politicians isn’t relevant at all. What Facebook doesn’t want is for you to be bored by a bunch of posts that aren’t ‘relevant’ to you and so everything that you see has to be amusing, it’s a newspaper tailored to your wants except that on the whole after a year of usage you might realise that you don’t like it all that much. 

Twitter has differences from Facebook. The obvious one is the character limit, which just prohibits anything complex to be discussed on the subject(not that people use the freedom on Facebook to discuss it), while people have figured out how to tweet storm the sentences themselves still have to be only 140 characters long. If left without any censorship this format is a heaven for trolls. On twitter you can’t make a rational argument since the allowed character limit is so short, so the best way to get around this is by indulging in logical fallacies the most prominent of them on twitter being adhominem. As a medium of factual updates twitter is a , but the issue is facts aren’t all that important to human beings. I don’t have a clear explanation as to how the short form exactly leads to trolls but it does have something to do with the fact that entertainment will win over rational argument for the majority. 
